---
layout: post
title: "A <strong>Internet</strong>"
subtitle: "Uma gigantesca <strong>rede</strong> de computadores"
section: web
---

A Internet não é a mesma coisa que a Web. A Internet é maior, mais antiga e mais variada.

Imagine o modo como as **estradas** se _interligam_ em todo o mundo: ruas pequenas ligam-se a ruas maiores na cidade, que por sua vez se ligam a estradas regionais, e estas ligam-se a autoestradas nacionais e internacionais. É possível conduzirmos desde nossa casa até qualquer outra casa em todo o mundo. Além disso, nesta rede de estradas não há um ponto central.

A Internet é semelhante a isto. Mas em vez de ter estradas, tem **cabos**. E em vez de casas, tem **computadores**. E em vez de haver carros a circular por esta rede, há **informação**.

Foi inventada em 1969 para ligar computadores em vários pontos dos EUA. Hoje em dia, _milhões_ de dispositivos (tais como PSc, laptops, telefones móveis, TVs, frigoríficos, ...) estão **interligados**.

### Cliente e Servidor

Geralmente, na Internet cada ligação ocorre entre apenas **2** computadores:

* um que **tem** a informação (o _servidor_)
* um que **quer ter** a informação (o _cliente_)

Um **cliente** é um programa que pode ter várias formas:
A **client** is a program that can take up many forms:

* um web browser (tal como o Firefox)
* um cliente de email (tal como o Outlook)
* uma aplicação de mensagens instantâneas (tal como o Whatsapp)
* um serviço de streaming (tal como o Netflix)

Cada um destes programas vai buscar informação a um **servidor**, onde alguma coisa se encontra guardada (um website, mensagens de email, outras mensagens, filmes, ...). Embora os programas cliente também enviem informação para o servidor, geralmente não a guardam.

Um **servidor** pode ser visto como um computador _dedicado_ que está sempre ligado à Internet, cujo único propósito é **servir** conteúdos.

Although any device connected to the Internet can be both a client and a server at the same time, most devices we use are considered **clients**, because we only _retrieve_ data, and don't deliver any.
{: .info}

### IP Address

Like every house has a specific and _unique_ postal address, each computer connected to the Internet is given an **IP address**, in order to be identified on the network.

An IP address usually looks like a combination of 4 numbers: `91.198.174.192`.

### Domains

Although IP addresses are useful for computers to tell each other apart thanks to their uniqueness, they are hard to read and remember for us humans.

That is why **domains** were created in 1985. They _associate_ an IP address like `91.198.174.192` with a string of **text** like `wikipedia.org`. As a result, both are **interchangeable**: you can go to <http://91.198.174.192> or <http://wikipedia.org> and end up on the exact same website.

A domain has **3** parts, that are read from right to left:

* **Top-Level Domain** (or TLD): there are generic ones (`.com`, `.org`, `.net`) and country-specific ones (`.us`, `.nl`, `.fr`).
* **Domain name**: a name like `wikipedia` or `marksheet`, that can include letters, numbers, but no space or dot.
* **Subdomain** (optional). Although this 3rd part is optional, most websites use `www` as the default subdomain.

Think of domains as a way to **name** computers connected to the Internet.

_How do I buy a domain?_{:.question}
You don't actually _buy_ a domain, but actually **rent** it from whoever is managing the TLD you're aiming for.  
Companies who manage Internet domains are called **domain registrars**. The most famous ones are [Namecheap](https://www.namecheap.com/) and [Gandi](https://www.gandi.net/).

### Protocols

The purpose of interconnecting all these computers is for them to **interact** with each other. And like humans talk in different _languages_, computers on the Internet talk using **protocols**.

Each of them serves a different purpose:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th>Protocol</th>
      <th>Used for</th>
      <th>Created in</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <abbr title="File Transfer Protocol">FTP</abbr>
      </td>
      <td>File transfer</td>
      <td>1971</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <abbr title="Simple Mail Transfer Protocol">SMTP</abbr>
      </td>
      <td>Sending Emails</td>
      <td>1971</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <abbr title="Internet Message Access Protocol">IMAP</abbr>
      </td>
      <td>Receiving Emails</td>
      <td>1986</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <abbr title="Internet Relay Chat">IRC</abbr>
      </td>
      <td>Chat</td>
      <td>1988</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <abbr title="HyperText Transfer Protocol">HTTP</abbr>
      </td>
      <td>Browsing HTML documents (Webpages)</td>
      <td>1989</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

### URL

Now that we've seen how domains and protocols, we can build a **URL**: a **U**niform **R**esource **L**ocator.

For example, the current page's URL is `http://marksheet.io/internet.html`, and can be divided in 3 parts:

* `http://` is the **protocol**
* `marksheet.io` is the **domain**
* `/internet.html` is the **path**

This URL is **unique** and defines

* _where_ to find something across the internet `marksheet.io/internet.html`
* _how_ the computer is supposed to read it `http://`

URLs can be more complex-looking. You can read about the [anatomy of an URL](http://doepud.co.uk/blog/anatomy-of-a-url).
{: .info}

Internet
: A very large **network** of **computers** connected to each other.

Protocol
: A set of rules, like a **language**, in which computers **communicate** with each other.

IP address
: A combination of **numbers** like `91.198.174.192` which acts like a **unique identifier** for a computer connected to the Internet

Domain
: A **text** like `marksheet.io` which acts like a **unique identifier** for a computer connected to the Internet.  
The difference with IP addresses is that domains are easier to read for **humans**.

[^1]: Apart from oceans obviously.

*[SMTP]: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
